{\rtf \li720 \fi-720 \sl240 \slmult1 \sa240 Choudhuri, Pallavi, and Sonalde Desai. 2021. \uc0\u8220{}Lack of Access to Clean Fuel and Piped Water and Children\uc0\u8217{}s Educational Outcomes in Rural India.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}World Development} 145: 105535. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2021.105535.\
Dave, Mona. \uc0\u8220{}A Thesis Submitted to the Faculty of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences of Georgetown University in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Master of Public Policy.\uc0\u8221{}\
Deichmann, Uwe, Craig Meisner, Siobhan Murray, and David Wheeler. 2011. \uc0\u8220{}The Economics of Renewable Energy Expansion in Rural Sub-Saharan Africa.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Energy Policy} 39(1): 215\uc0\u8211{}27. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.09.034.\
Karvanen, Juha, Santtu Tikka, and Matti Vihola. 2024. \uc0\u8220{}Simulating Counterfactuals.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research} 80: 835\uc0\u8211{}57. doi:10.1613/jair.1.15579.\
Khandker, Shahidur R., Douglas F. Barnes, and Hussain A. Samad. 2009. {\i{}Welfare Impacts Of Rural Electrification: A Case Study From Bangladesh}. The World Bank. doi:10.1596/1813-9450-4859.\
Khandker, Shahidur R, Hussain A Samad, Rubaba Ali, and Douglas F Barnes. \uc0\u8220{}Who Benefits Most from Rural Electrification?\uc0\u8221{}\
Rathi, Sambhu Singh, and Claire Vermaak. 2018. \uc0\u8220{}Rural Electrification, Gender and the Labor Market: A Cross-Country Study of India and South Africa.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}World Development} 109: 346\uc0\u8211{}59. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2018.05.016.\
Sedai, Ashish Kumar, Tooraj Jamasb, Rabindra Nepal, and Ray Miller. 2021. \uc0\u8220{}Electrification and Welfare for the Marginalized: Evidence from India.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Energy Economics} 102: 105473. doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2021.105473.\
Thomas, Daniel Robert, S.P. Harish, Ryan Kennedy, and Johannes Urpelainen. 2020a. \uc0\u8220{}The Effects of Rural Electrification in India: An Instrumental Variable Approach at the Household Level.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Journal of Development Economics} 146: 102520. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2020.102520.\
Thomas, Daniel Robert, S.P. Harish, Ryan Kennedy, and Johannes Urpelainen. 2020b. \uc0\u8220{}The Effects of Rural Electrification in India: An Instrumental Variable Approach at the Household Level.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Journal of Development Economics} 146: 102520. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2020.102520.\
Van De Walle, Dominique, Martin Ravallion, Vibhuti Mendiratta, and Gayatri Koolwal. 2015. \uc0\u8220{}Long-Term Gains from Electrification in Rural India.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The World Bank Economic Review}: lhv057. doi:10.1093/wber/lhv057.\
}